O-N-A-L-A, LA Times Meetup, if you're tweeting this,
O-N-A-L-A-T hashtag.
Welcome, we're, you know, this is kind of new ground for us.
We're, the LA Times is happy to host this event,
to get together more digital journalists in a room
than in this town, than we've seen in a while.
And I just welcome you and haven't prepared any remarks,
so I'm gonna turn it over to Julie,
who perhaps has prepared.
Yeah, there's this idea it's gonna get better from here,
but you might be disappointed.
Thank you guys so much for coming.
I really, I have no idea who you all are,
and that's so exciting.
I just, we wanted to start doing more of these
types of things to get people together,
with wine and snacks, and some information.
So we hope to keep doing these things,
and actually Robert is gonna talk about that.
Hello, I'm Robert Hernandez.
My Twitter handle is webjournalist,
some people know me from that.
Stand over here by the screen.
We, Kim and I started O-N-A-L-A about two years ago or so.
I'm a professor at USC, I moved back to LA
about three years ago, and I wanted to meet other web nerds,
and my virtual office wife and I met.
And since then, we've been trying to get people together
to kind of connect and nerd out and support each other.
And normally it tends to be with like 48 hours notice
at the Redwood, we haven't seen each other in a while,
so we meet and drink.
And thanks to Julie, we have this formal presentation
or programming that we hope to do every couple of months.
We wanna do it more, you know,
the formal sit down learning,
mind exchange every couple of months,
and then some social meetup every other month
or something like that.
It's great to see so many folks,
I know a chunk of you are from LA Times,
and some new folks I don't know as well.
Hope that this becomes a more routine thing,
because it's better, journalism is better,
the community is better served
when we kind of share our knowledge,
and experience, and be nerds together.
Thank you for coming.
Hi, I'm Kim, I am Robert's virtual office spouse.
And my only job is to tell you that if your newsroom,
or if you have ideas on what we should do for this programming,
we are willingly accepting them.
Just find one of us before, after the programming,
pitch your idea, or if you have a cool bar we should go to.
And also become a member of ONA,
because it's kind of awesome.
Who is a member of ONA?
I'm on the board for the national.
So, ONA, if you don't know, tends to be DC focused,
or historically it's been East Coast focused.
I got elected onto the board almost two years ago,
I'm up for reelection if I decide to run again this year.
But one of the things that I wanted to do
when I was on the board was to make sure
West Coast was represented in some form.
But we need members to participate.
Outside of a great conference,
there's other things like this
to kind of justify your membership,
but at the very least, as an ONA person,
it's this group that is growing.
I think it's the largest international web journalism,
online journalism organization.
And it's just growing and getting better,
but only made better through its members.
So please consider joining.
I think it's like 75 bucks or something, go on.
Please.
Martin's, sorry guys.
Martin's gonna introduce the wonderful data desk people,
but if everyone could give Martin a hand
because he did a great job getting all of this together.
Thank you.
So, without any further ado whatsoever,
Megan Garvey is our,
she's somehow attached to the data desk.
No one's really sure, but she'll tell you more about it.
She provides the alcohol.
I do do that, which is probably
why anyone listens to me at all.
They pointed that out to me.
So I'm Megan Garvey, and I've been at the LA Times
since 1998.
I started out as a very traditional print journalist,
and I can't even remember the first time I saw our website.
And then a few years ago,
I proposed an idea to do a database of California's war dead.
So the men and women who'd been killed
in the wars in California.
And at the time I'd worked with Doug Smith,
who's sitting, Doug, raise your hand.
There he is.
I had worked with Doug Smith on some data oriented projects
in the past, but at the time there was really no way
to publish most of what we did online.
So a lot of work went into stuff that ended up
as print graphics or informed stories,
but was never really made accessible to the public.
So I went to Doug and I said, I have this idea.
And he said, two months ago, I would have said,
great idea, no way, we can't do it.
But we just hired someone named Ben Welsh,
and I think you should meet him.
So that was the beginning of, I don't know what it is, but.
A beautiful friendship.
Yes, a beautiful friendship.
So the data desk here is really not,
it's funny because a lot of people think of it
as an official thing, but really what it is
is a group of people from different sections of the paper
who've kind of banded together.
I don't know if it's on a life boat or a ship or raft
or I don't know, a parachute.
I'm not sure exactly what it is, but.
Yes, only Doug, some kind of motorcycle.
But the nice thing about that is that we work together
by choice, and so it's been a lot of fun.
And we have a weekly meeting we call show and tell
where we often argue and fight with each other,
but at the end of the day, come up with good ideas.
And Ben is gonna come up and talk more
about what it is that we actually do
and what the data desk is.
And then we're gonna take a look at a project
that actually was born out of a lot of fighting
and arguing and discussing.
So Ben, come on up.
Hello, okay, so does this work when I stand this far away?
Can everybody hear me?
Okay, good.
My name's Ben Welsh, I work at the LA Times,
and I do this stuff like Megan said.
And our little band of people has been together
for a few years and we've put together some stuff,
and I'm gonna run you through kind of what we do
and our work, add some examples of that,
and then hand it off to Anthony to get more specific, okay?
So I'm gonna go through a lot of stuff really fast,
and if there's anything you have questions about
or you wanna know more about,
just raise your hand or say, hey, Ben, or whatever,
because this is informal enough that we can stop
and have a conversation, at least I hope so, okay?
So feel free when the time comes.
So the name of my talk is What is a Data Desk?
And I'm gonna walk you through kind of what we do.
If you wanna check out the slides later,
they're at this URL here at the bottom,
which is lat.ms slash Who is Data Desk?
Okay, so like Megan said,
the Data Desk is an informal team of reporters
and programmers here in downtown LA at the LA Times,
emphasis on team.
And what we do basically in like a really oversimplified way
is we turn databases into news,
though in some cases, news is into databases,
but that's like a whole other thing.
But usually we turn databases into news.
So like an example would be the California War Dead database
that Megan talked about where there's a record
for every casualty and then all those go,
every one of those casualties gets its own page
on the internet and you sort of turn the database
into something on a news website
that is different from a story, right?
Other examples we've done that are more notorious
include the rating of how well every teacher at LAUSD
improves the test scores of their students,
every person who's on the Hollywood Walk of Fame
would be another example too.
This is where you build the database
that is sort of news in its way, right?
That means that we write code, right?
Like real code, we don't just talk about it,
we do it and we do it all day, right?
And I like to write a lot of Django, that's my favorite,
and we do a lot of our projects in Django,
which is a Python framework
that makes it easier to build websites.
So it's the Python programming language,
it's all these handy shortcuts
that make doing stuff a lot easier, right?
And this is an example of a stack
that you would use to put out a Python website
that actually a lot of our sites
kind of work a little bit like this.
But that's not all that we use, right?
There's a lot of other technologies that we use,
there's people different from me
who have different opinions and use different software
like Doug, who uses a lot of SAS,
though I'm trying to win him over, gradually.
And there's other projects that you work on
where certain tools are better than other tools, right?
And so these are just some examples
of different technologies we use.
I'm sort of, I'm showing my age
with the DHTML reference, right?
Is anyone here old enough to remember that, right?
Yes, right, I like to remind the younger developers,
the internet had buzzwords before you were born, right?
And anyway, but we also still can write in English,
we didn't lose that when we became computer programmers.
I know some people think that or that like they're somehow,
they're like two, the two things don't go together,
but that's not true at all.
We remain the people we were before,
we learned to program, right?
And these are some examples of some front page stories
that have come out of our work, right?
And so now here we go through it.
One thing we do, we make a lot of maps, right?
That's the globe lobby you've just seen.
I call it Art Deco Data Vis, right?
In a certain sense, but we have a site
where we map out the most recent crimes
in the city of Los Angeles by neighborhood.
Ken, it built a beautiful site to show every homicide
in LA County over the last what, six years?
Something like that.
Something like that and Malloy and Sarah Artilani
do a ton of awesome work to keep that up to date.
You know, there's, we do a lot of other data
by neighborhood, this is the census,
this is every marijuana dispensary in Los Angeles, right?
And we're putting out a lot of maps like this.
Yeah, I know, this is not minimal, right?
This is whatever the opposite of minimal is.
And this is a very recent map I'm geeked about
because this is one that Ken did to coincide
with the LA riots with a lot of research from Malloy
that shows everyone who died during the LA riots.
And one that's really interesting in itself,
but one little geeky thing
that maybe some users wouldn't notice
is this is the first LA Times map
that has custom map tiles.
It doesn't rely on Google maps for its service.
Ken has done a lot of awesome work
using OpenStreetMap and Tile Mill
to get us on the path to escape from Google maps, right?
And so this was our Sputnik.
So besides maps, we also do investigations, right?
You know, a lot of data work that people think of
as data journalism or as this brand new web thing
that never existed before because whatever,
because big data is a buzzword now, it isn't true.
I mean, computer assisted reporting is a geeky term,
but it's been around for 25 years
and people like Doug and Sandy and Malloy
who are in this room have used technical skills
to do investigations for literally decades
and we still do that, right?
So a recent example is Malloy and Ken
worked on a story about all those people
who then died in the riots
and the cases that are still open, right?
That's a recent one.
Last year we did a big investigation about autism
in California and across the country
that included a lot of data analysis
done by Doug and Sandy Poindexter
who I don't think is here.
But that's really good stuff if you haven't seen it.
That's at latimes.com slash autism.
I'd recommend the whole package.
And then, you know, when Occupy hit last year,
I was able to use some data to do a quickie census
of the people who were arrested, right?
So we still do a lot of these classic things
that have to do with data analysis and investigations.
Right, we also train robot reporters.
That's another thing that we do, right?
So what does that mean, right?
Well, so for instance, this is a blog post
from the Homicide Report, right?
Which is a site that Ken built
and is staffed by some people here at the Times
where we write a blog post for every person
who is killed in Los Angeles County, right?
We're the only ones who do this.
Now, you know, that's a lot of work and we can't staff it.
But one way to make it less work
is to automate some of the easy stuff.
So as soon as the spreadsheet comes in from the corner
every Monday, every Monday, Malloy, right,
feeds it into the system.
And the system, just based on the basic data fields
that are in the spreadsheet, the age of the person,
their race, their name, the location of where they died.
Is there anything else that's, how they died
that like you ever stabbed or shot?
Ken has written some code that will take those rows
and fields from the spreadsheet
and write the first paragraph to every story.
So before any human has to do any work,
well, barring Malloy, you know, right?
Right, sorry, Malloy's going by pseudonym tonight,
I'm sorry.
That initial paragraph is automatically written
with no human intervention.
And that's not all we do, but it's the bare minimum, right?
So we have something up as soon as possible.
And then if or when we're able to assign more resources
to cover homicide, that person can then write through that
and add more material onto the post, right?
Which in this case was Robert Lopez,
who was in the room but had to leave, right?
And we take that approach to a lot of different things.
Here's a blog post that appears a couple times a week,
every time new crime data is fed to us by the LAPD,
where we have an algorithm that goes through it,
identifies the neighborhoods that are having unusually
high amount of crime, and writes this post
and makes this map and does all this
with no human work whatsoever, right?
We have pages for all these neighborhoods about crime
and all this text is automatically written by algorithm.
And one, the example I think is the coolest
is one that Ken did, where he has a computer application
that sits on top of the USGS's database
and notification system.
And every time an earthquake notification goes out,
it processes that, has certain filters it puts it through
before it decides it's newsworthy, right?
And that's his news judgment written into code, right?
And then if it's a newsworthy earthquake
according to the algorithm, this blog post,
this map, all this automatically written, fed into the blog,
email sent to the editor, get on it, right?
I bet people in this room have covered earthquakes.
Somebody has probably, who doesn't work here?
And what, yeah, and what usually happens, right?
What usually happens, either it hits the wire
and you're like, oh shit, we missed it.
Or somebody says, did you feel that?
And then everybody is clicking around on the USGS website.
Where is it, where's that link?
They have 18 versions.
Which one is this one, it fought, fought, fought, fought, fought.
Right?
And in this case, in our case, that's Ron Lynn, right?
That's the, for the LA Times people.
But we don't need to do that anymore.
The computer can do it.
And Ron Lynn could work on his investigation
into corruption at the Coliseum Commission
and freakin' make our city a better place to live.
You know what I mean?
You worry about this stupid earthquake, right?
Unless an earthquake hits the city.
Unless an earthquake hits the city.
One that surpasses a certain barrier on your algorithm, right?
So anyway, that's a cool example of that.
We also build open source tools, right?
We have a GitHub account.
Who here is on GitHub?
Right, so GitHub is like the social network
for computer programmers.
It's where you put your open source code up on there
and your friends can follow it, right?
And when you make an update, you patch some code,
they get a little Facebook update, right?
And you can, it's true.
It sounds, and it's awesome.
So I don't know what's so funny.
But like if you wanna like learn to code
or get into programming or have something better
than a crappy PDF resume, I'd recommend
that you put your code up on GitHub
and share it with the world and you know,
start participating in what is really a historic
like thing in computer programming.
And so we have a GitHub account and you know,
we're not anything special, but we've got you know,
10 or 12 open source projects that are out there
that we're you know, trying to build a community around.
And this is just a couple examples.
One is we have a framework for quickly making
an interactive table.
You know, you wanna make, you wanna search and sort
and filter really simply a table on deadline.
We've built a framework internally that can do that
and open sourced it.
It's called Table Stacker.
It's being used by about a half dozen different newsrooms.
This here on MinPost.
Here we had, Ken made a really great library,
a wrapper on top of the AP's election data service,
that like FTP that they dump everything on,
that makes it really, really easy for you
to write Python code to put the data out
and put it up on your website.
And after he did that, probably what,
six or seven different news organizations
have just stopped writing that same redundant code
themselves and instead are using ours.
And not only are they getting something out of it,
they're contributing patches, fixes and features
to our code so we don't have to do any work
and they're making our life easier, right?
Okay, so that's the benefit.
Right, another example is this is a fun one.
It's like auto complete for address searches.
It uses the Google Geocoder as you type in an address.
That's the LA Times address.
It starts to suggest different places, right,
which is kind of fun.
But there's a lot of other ones if you go to
github.com slash data desk.
Okay, and Anthony who's gonna follow me up here,
this is him on Twitter, Anthony J. Pesci, so follow him.
He does a lot of different work here,
but one thing that he focuses on
and has really had a lot of success with
is taking some of our print or less interactive
graphic stuff and making it more interactive
or more up to speed with the latest stuff on the web.
And he's gonna show you in depth one of those examples,
but here's some other stuff that he's done.
We have a template now to make a California counties map
just using a spreadsheet.
We just upload the spreadsheet,
boom, we've got the map like in 10 or 15 minutes,
the power of automation, right?
These are maps we have to do a lot.
Same thing for the US states, he's made that.
This is a recent one that he did for a big Sunday package
that's more custom, that's about the boulevards
of Los Angeles, our architecture critic is walking people
through the major changes on them.
And this sits on top of this big story he's written,
which you can find where?
What's the URL?
LAtimes.com slash boulevards.
This just came out on Sunday.
We have templates now for doing these big long graphics
where you sort of have a little nav that changes
as you scroll down and you can link to.
And the template is done in a way so that the graphics staff
who couldn't build a page like this without some training,
all they have to do is upload the images at a certain size
and boom, they've got a graphic like this.
So since they've done this,
since we introduced this template,
they've probably done what a dozen of these?
Right, and it takes graphics work that in many cases
either would have been in print,
appreciated by print readers and then hated on the web
because it was in a crappy template
or just totally lost on the web
and puts it in a really just simple template
that makes it like actually halfway enjoyable
for the internet, more than halfway Anthony, like, you know,
like, but yeah.
And it's really been amazing to me to see the response
on social media where it's just graphics
that were in a sense routine
for our really talented graphics artists
that were just ignored online,
suddenly can have a lot of success on social media
just because there's something to link to
that people don't hate, right?
And so like this particular graphic,
this is the, of all the things we've done
since I've been here,
one of the things I'm most proud of
is that William Gibson tweeted this graphic.
The man who like freaking brought drones
and science fiction together
and like was way ahead of all this stuff,
he loved this graphic, right?
Which was by Raul, I think down in the graphics department.
Yeah, see, thank you, Will.
Will works down there.
And you know, would William Gibson have seen it
and tweeted it to his tens of thousands
of really influential like tech followers
if it hadn't been in something, you know, reasonably good.
Also, Anthony did a lot of great work
in getting live data out of Ken's data feed
and into some interactive maps
so that we were able to have live county by county results
for all the GOP primaries, right?
Anyway, so you should follow us, right?
And here's where you can find us on the web.
Our website where we have our big projects
and also a feed of our latest stuff
is at datadesk.latimes.com.
You can follow us on Twitter at latdatadesk,
which will have all that latest stuff as well.
And you should get on GitHub if you're not already
and follow us at github.com slash datadesk.
That's about it.
We consistently do have internships here at the LA Times
so if there's anyone who would be interested with that
in the last three or four years
we've had three data desk interns, is that right?
The first was Ken who now works here.
The second was Michelle Minkoff
who now works for the AP in DC, right?
And the third was Alan Vestal who is either gonna take a job
or go to grad school, I haven't heard yet,
but has been offered jobs.
And so there's a lot of demand for this stuff.
If you wanna pick up some skills
and get thrown in the deep end, we're happy to do it.
And I promise you there'll be work for you somewhere
when you come out the other side.
So if you wanna do that.
Apply with a GitHub account.
Apply with a GitHub account and talk to Dan Gaines
who's my supervisor who I don't think is here
but his email is very small at the bottom.
It's daniel.gaines at latimes.com, right?
Or onlinejobsatlatimes.com
Or onlinejobsatlatimes.com says Tracy Boucher
who you could probably also bother after this meeting
if you wanted to.
And that's my whole talk.
Does anybody have any questions
before I hand it over to Anthony?
Robert.
Do you take two seconds not to buy a Kickstarter project?
Okay, so outside of my work in the last few weeks
I launched a website which is called Past Pages.
It is at pastpages.org.
And it is essentially, let's see if we can fire it up here
maybe, let's run with scissors as Sarah Cohen would call it.
We're gonna use the live web.
And essentially every hour it goes through
several dozen internet news site homepages
and takes snapshots of them
where it will hopefully archive them forever.
A lot of you are probably familiar
with the Wayback Machine at archive.org
which is a really awesome site.
However, it doesn't update often enough
or regular enough to really do thorough study
of what media is up to.
And so the goal of this site is to really regularly capture
as many media homepages as possible
so that academics like Robert can have a great resource
to study what happens on these pages over time.
Like what if you could do an academic study
of every photo of Michelle Obama
that was used by the media before this election, right?
Or whatever, right?
You can start thinking about different ways you can do it.
Or when we have a financial collapse next year,
how the Wall Street Journal decides to cover that, right?
So it has an academic use.
Second, hopefully I think it has a media criticism use.
For instance, last week the Drudge Report
posted a false story about how President Obama
had fabricated things in his memoir.
It was only up for several minutes and then it disappeared
but the screenshots on this site captured it.
So if someone wanted to write a story pointing out
that Matt Drudge likes to hype things
that usually aren't true,
they could use that as evidence.
Right, so, and also, you know,
if you work at one of these news outlets
and you just wanna keep track of what's going on
with your homepage over time,
I hope it can be useful to you.
This is an indie endeavor that I have funded
out of my own pocket and built on my own time.
But thanks to everybody on Twitter and other people
in the awesome community of online geeks,
I've raised $5,000 via Kickstarter to try to keep it alive.
And so if you have any thoughts about
what it ought to do or ought to be
or what I've screwed up with it,
please feel free to tell me afterwards.
It is pastpages.org.
Any other questions?
No, okay, well, with that, I'll hand it over to Anthony.
This is one of the more recent projects that I've worked on
and it is a sort of interactive web graphic
for looking at how super PACs are spending their money
in the primary race.
Does everybody know what a super PAC is?
So a political action committee is sort of
supposedly independent organization
that can spend money during a campaign, right?
Super PACs, a result of a recent Supreme Court decision,
can spend unlimited amounts of money
called independent expenditures
and can receive unlimited donations from interested parties.
In many cases, super PACs are not supposed to be
tied to a candidate or controlled by a candidate in any way.
They're supposed to be independent,
but many of these PACs are run by people
who are friends and advisors and work with
some of the candidates.
So we've tried to describe some of the super PAC activity
happening in the selection using this graphic.
Before I get into it too much,
I wanted to show ProPublica has done some excellent work
looking at super PACs also, both spending and contributors
and the New York Times has done some work
on super PACs as well,
looking at some of the top contributors among other things.
We took a look at some of this work
and decided that we wanted to contribute something
to the story about what was happening with super PACs
in this election season.
And we sort of sat in a meeting on a Friday afternoon
and argued for about an hour.
And sort of decided that, after looking at some of the data
and decided that what's probably going to be
the most interesting story or at least a very interesting
story is how are these candidates using affiliated
but not affiliated PACs to spend money on other candidates?
And we sort of discovered, tell you right here,
56% of all of these expenditures
have been spent opposing candidates.
And you can see from looking at this graphic
that Mitt Romney spent an exorbitant amount of money,
almost $21 million opposing Santorum
and almost $19 million opposing Newt Gingrich
and in large part knocked them out of the race.
So you don't really get that looking here.
You don't really get that looking here.
And I think one of the key things we decided
both specifically about this graphic and in general
about the kinds of presentations we wanna do
for a database is it needs to tell a story.
So for us it was really important to have something
that was quick and relatively digestible
where you could come here and see what was happening
in a way that you couldn't if you just received
sort of a dump of a database onto a webpage.
And you can dive in.
We have a timeline where you can look at spending over time.
So you can see Romney's really concerned about Newt Gingrich
in January and February.
Newt didn't do so well.
He starts contributing against Santorum.
Most of these large jumps you see by the way
are right before key state primaries.
And then, okay there goes Santorum
and lately now he's spending money on himself.
You can see very recently Obama has started spending
some money against Romney.
We still have people like Herman Cain and Huntsman
and Rick Perry here.
But you can dive in.
So it tells a story initially when you come to the page
to look at it and it allows you to sort of come in
and explore and look at how the spending has evolved
over the course of the primary season.
Any questions so far?
Okay.
We also have a spreadsheet available of the biggest donors.
Very, very wealthy and politically interested people
who are contributing to one or more super PACs
and in incredibly large amounts of money.
This would not have been really possible before
or at least not like this.
So I'm gonna tell you a little bit about how we get
and clean and process the data and store it in a database
and then I'm gonna talk very briefly about some of the code
that went into it.
This is, we get all of our data from the FEC,
the Federal Election Commission.
If you come to this page, FEC.gov slash data slash
independent expenditure dot do,
you can look at the latest filings
and this is updated what, every day or two more?
It depends on the committee but it's on a 24, 48 hour cycle.
They update each file, each committee file.
So the FEC has kindly provided this interface
where you can come and you can start to explore the data
and you can download it here with a CSV as a CSV
which is what we do which gets you this.
Not a particularly handy format
although you can sort of see what they have, right?
So there's a candidate name and some sort of ID
and another ID, a state maybe, which office it is,
how much money, the date.
There's a lot of data here.
It's somewhat indecipherable what's going on.
So we wrote a program to come to this page,
download the CSV, store it into a database
and from there, there's a little bit of a manual process
for cleaning up the data that Malloy can talk more about.
But essentially the problem is when you come to this page
and you download the spreadsheet,
if you were to do a sum on this expended amount
on the spreadsheet, it wouldn't actually be accurate
because you can amend an FEC filing.
So if you file one report that says you spent 20 bucks
on advertising, you can come back and you can say,
oops, I forgot a line item.
I actually spent 20 bucks here and five bucks there
and that just gets inserted into the top of the spreadsheet
with all of the new expenses and all of the old expenses
and you kind of have to manually go through
and figure out what's what and what amended what
and that's this column, AMN underscore IND, right?
And if it's an N, it means it has not been amended
and if it's an A1 or an A2, it means it has been.
So you kind of have to figure out
where these expenses line up.
And Molloy, do you wanna come up for a sec?
So Molloy is our fabulous researcher
who spends her days toiling away doing this.
So go to the FEC.
So the one thing you'll notice on this site,
this is the FEC site where you can look at,
this is an example of associated buildings
and it's every day they file a report
and then they file quarterly or monthly
depending on what cycle they're on
but you can see here that that filing amended
the one that filed it.
So back in Anthony's database,
what I have to do is I have to say,
I wanna keep the 77820 and I wanna get rid
of everything else because if I don't,
then I'm gonna do this double count
and there's not a nice way to do it
except manually look at the file, the spreadsheet
and look at those 5D numbers and then come back in here
and get rid of the ones I don't want
and keep the ones I do want.
And it doesn't take a lot of time
but I have noticed before that I've not been careful.
I thought, oh, I've gotten rid of everything
and then I'm like looking at things
and I've forgotten to eliminate stuff.
It goes by pretty quickly.
You can do it in a pretty quick span of time
and get rid of the things you don't need to have.
So this is sort of a peek at our admin for this site.
It's powered by a database of all of these expenditures.
The one thing back on this file that we're starting with,
this is Super PACs working to,
for the presidential campaign and congressional campaign too.
So that's our next thing we're gonna work on.
We're gonna look at how Super PACs
are supporting congressional races in California.
But basically the workflow on something like this
we've set up is I have this script
that can go and fetch the spreadsheet from the FEC,
look at everything, store it in our database,
but we can't publish that live right away.
You need to actually take a minute, look at the data,
fix any of the amended filings,
make sure it passes the smell test
and then hit a publish button.
So we have an interface where in this admin,
you click a button and it pulls the data from the FEC.
When the robot has finished loading it into the database,
it emails me and Malloy.
We see if there are any amended filings,
if there are any new PACs, if anything's really changed,
it'll summarize this in the email.
Malloy can come in, see all of the new amended filings,
check them manually against this horrible thing
on the FEC's website by searching for the,
the identifier, check a few boxes,
make sure everything's kosher, hit publish,
and then the graphic updates.
So it's really important on something like this
where you're relying on an external data source
that you have a robot going to download and process
that you actually do have a human who sort of sits there
and looks at it and says, okay, everything looks good,
everything's lining up, we're gonna hit publish.
I would strongly recommend that.
Other people have made a mistake.
It's just a reminder that for all the stuff
you do programmatically we still need common sense
and knowledge and thought and so that,
we kind of joke around about how they just push a button
but the truth is there's almost none of that.
Almost nothing that we do is that simple.
It either required work on the front end
like Ken's earthquake program to decide
what was newsworthy and what should we exclude
or on this stuff which is very complicated
and we've spent a long time really learning
the political campaign process
and brings a lot of knowledge to it.
So I mean Ben kind of jokes about like a robot reporter.
The point is to take care of the busy work
and reserve sort of the brain power and stuff
that really matters to produce the quality content
out the other end.
Exactly and so this is a sort of database view
of that CSV I was showing you earlier.
This is all of the information we get from the FEC.
We have a separate admin where we can for instance
tie a pack to a specific candidate.
So we do all of that in the back and then we hit go
and then it spits out this nice page
that is actually powered by an extremely robust database
that we've spent a great deal of time developing
and cleaning and checking.
Malloy and I have double and triple and quadruple
checked the accuracy of all of this
on at least a number of occasions
and we keep like going back and doing it again.
So we know it's good.
And this is sort of how you would arrive at that.
It's a Django database.
This is a very simple pack model
where it's the Sierra Club.
They have their FEC unique identifier
and if we wanted to tie the Sierra Club
to any one of these candidates we could.
For those of you who don't have the programming
and research resources to build your own database,
write scripts to automate pulling in FEC data
and have a researcher who has years and years of experience
dealing with the FEC to go in and clean it up.
The New York Times handily has a campaign finance API
that actually ProPublica uses for this presentation
that if you want to start playing around
with some of this campaign finance data
I would highly recommend it.
I haven't spent a great deal of time in here myself
although I've talked to a couple of the developers
who made it and they are very smart people.
And you can for instance come in and get a JSON list
of the most recent expenditures that looks like this
through the New York Times campaign finance API.
You need an API key.
I'm pretty sure anyone in this room could get one.
And it's a very nice representation of the FEC data.
I'm not positive the New York Times cleans it up
in the same way that we do although I would imagine
that they do.
Probably something to look into if you're interested
in using it.
On the front end, so I talked about the database
and stuff on the front end, this is all just JavaScript.
So for those of you who know a little bit of HTML
there's actually not a lot of fancy stuff going on
like this is just a table.
Like it's an HTML table which is handy
because you're dealing with a graphic
that it has huge sums of money that are changing
and growing every single day.
And you have this opposed column on one side
and a support column on the other side
and you need to make sure that everything is fitting
into 980 pixels and that the bars are all sized appropriately
for the space you have and the amount of money
they're supposed to represent.
Django, which is the software we use sort of on the backend
to develop this, has some very handy features
that you can apply on the template
that will automatically resize your divs
based on a value and a maximum width, right?
So in this case the maximum width is 980 pixels
and your value is 20 million dollars
and then your maximum value is 33 million dollars,
34 million dollars.
So like the pixels on the div are actually
completely representative of the amount of money
that they're supposed to have
and everything sizes automatically.
And all of that is sort of handled for me.
The table adjusts automatically if more
falls under the oppose or the support
because an HTML table is just built that way.
The divs all size appropriately
because we have some code on the backend
and a full featured piece of software
to sort of handle that for us.
And then, how many of you have heard of jQuery?
Right, so if you don't know JavaScript
or don't have a lot of front end development experience,
you can actually sort of get a long way using jQuery.
Like this, this was a feature we added later
but we have the date picker and slider.
Somebody had written a jQuery plugin
for a slider by date range, or not by date range,
just for a slider, right?
And I went in and I lightly modified it
to accommodate what I needed
and in less than a day's work,
it was working for my specific application, right?
So chances are if you have a feature in mind
or you want to sort of accomplish something technically,
someone has already kind of done a lot of the work
for you and open sourced it.
And that was true here.
So my focus here was writing some JavaScript
to handle the math to sort of adjust all of these numbers
and adjust the different sizes of the bars and the divs
to accommodate the slide,
but I didn't actually have to code the slider from scratch.
So I got to focus on the actual problem,
which was the math and making sure everything was adjusted
and like the numbers and these tool tips update
as you drag it, like, you know,
making sure all of that worked as I wanted it to
and tested that and not so much worry about the rest.
We have some code on the backend also that takes, right,
all of these different FEC expenditures and transactions
we have stored in the database.
It sort of looks at all of them in aggregate,
does some math and spits out a JSON feed onto this page
that we then use to render the graphic.
Does anybody know what JSON is?
Okay, it's a way of sort of serializing your data
so that it comes out in a structured,
easy to use way on the front end.
Much like this, right?
So instead of some crazy, right, like FEC spreadsheet,
you actually sort of see the breakdown of the data
and it's easy for you to come in
and programmatically access and process.
So that probably just about does it
in terms of this presentation.
I'm happy to answer questions about it
or to show off some other stuff
we've been doing with elections lately.
So, yeah.
Just the qualifying, if an ad is
definitively opposing one candidate
or supporting another candidate,
because some apps do die and kind of split,
even though the 30 seconds kind of split the time,
is that an editorial decision that you see the FEC make?
Luckily, that is not a call we make, right?
So the FEC in their filing requirements
makes them pick, right?
So they have this neat column
in their spreadsheet support repose.
And that comes over to us automatically.
Otherwise, it would be a nightmare.
Like there would be literally no way.
Yeah, that's an interesting question.
I mean, maybe you could game the system
by faking some of your FEC filings, although I doubt it.
So the colors are key to the candidate.
So this is Romney.
This is Santorum.
This is Mr. Gingrich.
I mean, a bunch of us laugh because, I mean,
colors are a horrifying job to get to online.
You've got Anthony, God bless him, is color blind,
so he's our special needs face
on the data team.
That's one of the reasons we kept him.
He actually started as an intern on the onset before it,
which he was not necessarily.
And it taught himself, you know,
most of that, all of his color stuff.
So early on, when we had, you know,
a large number of Republican candidates who were getting votes,
we had to choose colors that would read easily online
and not be shaped to their minds.
Sorry, I was saying that early on
when we had a lot of Republican candidates still in the race,
we were faced with finding enough colors
that were distinct and yet not political,
you know, in order to display them.
So for instance, like, you know, and we went,
believe me, this was like through the ringer on this.
This could be a whole ONA presentation on its own.
But, you know, for instance, like,
you can't give Romney red.
I mean, that indicates that you think
he's gonna win eventually, even if you did think that.
You know, it's like, so we went through
a lot of different incarnations.
So all this is, is this was trying for consistency
throughout our presentation.
So as we were presenting the live election nights,
live election results on primary nights,
we wanted to make sure that throughout
our whole presentation of the primaries
and then into the general
that we were consistent with colors.
Of course, as we switch into the general,
if, you know, Romney does in fact
become the nominee at the convention
and Obama is the nominee,
then we go into much more traditional red and blue colors.
But, you know, we have a whole,
I mean, is this like the prettiest map we could have made?
No.
But can you understand who got which votes?
And there's all sorts of things to like,
you know, like there's this whole debate.
Can we give Bachman pink?
We had to switch that.
You know, you're gonna make her pink, you know,
and then, you know, you went right.
So it was a big debate, but that's what it is.
It's basically trying to be consistent from here
throughout the rest of the products
that we created for the campaign.
I can tell there's probably other people in the room
who have faced this problem.
It's very, very fun.
Any other questions?
I wonder if how many LA Times journalists source this data?
Also, do you see other journalists
that are doing this data?
All right, so the question is how many LA Times
journalists are sourcing this data
and what other organizations are doing the same thing?
Okay, how many of us work on it,
on elections or super PACs?
Yeah, we actually field requests from reporters
and our DC Bureau on a fairly regular basis,
particularly with campaign finance.
Malloy does a lot of that.
Doug Smith and Sandra Poindexter
also do a lot of that.
I sort of have the keys to the database
on the super PAC expenditures.
So I help out from time to time
when there's a super PAC specific question.
So the number of people who are looking at
and cleaning up and analyzing this kind of data,
five or six maybe, including Malloy, Doug Smith,
Sandy Poindexter, and then Ken and me
and then other organizations.
New York Times is doing it.
Open Secrets does it.
Anyone else?
I'm sure there's other people.
I think every lot of organizations are playing too
because we all know that the kind of money
that's going to be spent during this campaign cycle,
why people have it, is kind of hard to wrap it all around.
They're already very close to 100 million dollars.
And that's not even talking about
what the management committee themselves is going to do.
It's going to be a lot of money spent.
So our goal here was to try and get people an idea
of how much money is being spent
and how it is being spent.
And you can see in this example here
that we're on the test with the past affiliated with law
and we are in support of the expense of a lot of money
and we have to get rid of the
I mean a lot of money.
It was fascinating to watch with the timeline.
You could see a moment in time when all of a sudden
one of me turned his attention to the timeline.
He no longer cared about the image.
We could watch it and we got our interest in Europe.
We were like, you just had a white coat.
Now, you could see this moment in time.
It was very clear that there had been a shift
and that English was no longer a threat.
For that, this has been really useful.
I think it's really a good tool to try and explain
how this campaign is going to play out with super PAC money.
That was kind of our motivation in using it.
I think a lot of other organizations
are trying to use super PACs to tell the story
and do it in different ways.
Do you talk about, if you remember,
what can you first, if you will,
in terms of the branding, design,
when you knew that the story was about spending a post-up,
or did you go through data first and then say,
this is the story we are going to tell,
then you go to find it.
Does that make sense?
It does and it was a lot of both.
We had looked at what some of our competitors were doing.
We looked at ProPublica, we looked at MIT, OpenSecrets,
a couple other people,
and saw what they had done.
It's, in some cases, a little bit difficult to come here
and quickly process what's happening.
We knew we wanted to tell a story.
We didn't want to have a data dump
that a reader or a viewer would have to come in
and sift through in order to figure out
what's going on in the world.
So, we had this philosophy like,
we don't have as many resources
as some of the other news organizations out there.
We're a small team, three developers,
three people who analyze and play with data.
We can't do everything and be everything all the time.
So, a lot of the times, we want to try and focus
on one really great thing,
one really great part of the data that we can show off,
one really great interactive or feature
that we can do and do really well
rather than trying to,
rather than doing the whole thing.
Like, you know, in this case, or in this case,
like ProPublica has this really great tree map
of the biggest donors that we haven't,
we would very much like to do
but have not gotten around to yet.
This is another example of something like that
where we just launched this recently.
You know, the idea here was we wanted to give people
information about what states were considered
at play in the election.
So, we have our wonderful DC Bureau
wrote a very informative blurb about each state.
And we've made editorial selections
about which states are considered battleground states
that the reader can come in and turn either Obama or Romney
to see what the results could be.
You know, and the Huffington Post and the New York Times
and other news organizations have done a lot more
with this kind of data.
We wanted to make something that was both informative
and fun, something that focused you on
what was really the story, what was really going on,
rather than giving you a ton of different options
and sort of overwhelming the user.
But, you know, so our philosophy on Super PACs was,
let's tell a story, let's come in and find a unique way
of presenting the data and telling the best story
about what was interesting.
So, we looked at what our competitors had done.
We looked at the raw data.
We sat around the table for a long time,
sort of batting back and forth different ways
of presenting it and different things to break it down by.
And a lot of it was dictated by what the FEC gave us, right?
So, they gave us support and oppose.
We knew pretty well which PACs were affiliated
with each candidate.
And we decided we wanted to look at how
those PACs were spending on other candidates.
And we, you know, you kind of had an idea at the outset
that it would probably be a lot of negative.
And it was.
And, you know, you come to this page
and you immediately see that Rami has just spent
exorbitant amounts of money opposing Santorum and Gingrich.
And this was sort of,
this kind of storytelling is what we were after.
So, it was, you know, a combination of
what's the best way of presenting the data?
What do we have already that's available?
And what looking at it do we think is interesting
or is going to be interesting?
Both, if the raw data already and just sort of knowing,
having that knowledge of what we thought
was probably gonna happen.
I was just wondering if there was an exception
in the equation, how many people
were there to be required for the project?
That's a good question.
So, the question is from, you know,
the first idea to launch, basically,
how much time and resources and people
were required for the project.
I did pretty much all of the coding front and back.
Malloy did a tremendous amount of work,
initially cleaning up all of the FEC data
and continually, every single day,
every time we update it, it's coming in
and doing work to clean up the filings.
A few weeks.
So, it was a pretty quick turnaround, considering.
You talked about the secular sub-product,
whether some of these people are using, you know,
some of these people.
Sure.
Yeah, I decided to learn to code because I wanted a job.
I, you know, I came here as an intern
and I was a web intern and I got lucky enough
to be placed with Megan on the data team, writing.
Is it on camera?
This is on camera.
I was lucky enough to be placed with Megan Garvey
as an intern.
And sort of looked at Ben and looked at Ken
when he came in as an intern also
and sort of figured like, you know,
the company's bankrupt.
They're not gonna hire me unless I have
seriously marketable skills, right?
So, I worked on the skills.
I started off, I sort of already knew a little bit of HTML,
no JavaScript, so I polished my HTML skills,
picked up jQuery.
From there, I learned more JavaScript.
Through books.
Books and websites like W3schools is really good
for HTML in particular.
And then from there, I learned Python and then Django.
Two years?
Three years?
Something in there.
Oh, nine.
Yeah.
Since 2009.
Takes a while.
Yes.
Absolutely.
I think it's pretty rare that we launch
a fully baked product right off the bat.
And we're trying to sort of get away
from that attitude as well.
But no, this, it launched sort of as a more
static version of this.
The date range picker and slider was not here.
But, like, this stuff was.
Oh, right, this, right.
The sort of rollover where you could see how a candidate
get highlighted on it was added later.
The date range slider was added later.
But it launched looking a lot like this.
And we'd like to add, like, it's nice to see the events
that precipitated some of the spending.
So like the South Carolina primary,
or the Gingrich winning South Carolina,
or St. John dropping out of the race.
We've got some space issues.
Anthony actually cleaned that up earlier today.
So I think it's always a work in progress.
I've never done that.
And yeah, the other thing is we have this great database now
of all of these expenditures and super packs.
And we have one page, right, which is great.
But it'd be nice if we had detail pages on each pack.
It'd be nice if we could do a little bit more
and tell a few more stories with the enormous amount
of data we have and the great database we have from the FEC.
So certainly there's a plan to do more.
What it's gonna be yet is still a little bit up in the air.
But this was an evolution.
And then there will be more with the data later
after the California primary, probably.
Yes.
Is there a lot of response to this?
Or is there anything that you'd like to say?
We've gotten some great response on this.
Apparently not a lot of comments, but.
But this map though, there are so many comments.
It's really.
But stuff like this, it does well.
And I sit next to our homepage producers
and can badger them to link to more interactive
and database-driven work that we're doing.
And we regularly are sending emails to all of our bloggers
and reporters in DC to get stuff linked up
that we do on their posts.
So it's an ongoing effort to get even our stuff promoted
across the website in the way that it should be.
But when people do find it, it does really well.
And people spend a lot of time on these pages.
And they do well on their own, just in terms of page views.
We have a much longer half-life story.
The story's gonna get 99% views per two hours.
Something like this can be linked to stories
that come from the website.
And then they actually have a lot more answers,
but we're not always allowed to be linked to versions
of the stuff like this under them.
After all, it's gonna be linked to stories like this.
Yeah.
Sorry, so.
The question is about how much of the work that we do
makes it back into print.
And Ben showed a couple examples early on of that
where does this precise graphic make it into print?
This has not yet.
There might be other examples where it has.
But I think that we've really worked to try to do more,
to inform more of print by some of the web work
that we're doing and not be so dictated
by what we would do for print anyway.
So that's definitely a struggle that has gone on.
And the thing is, so like what Ben was saying,
where there's a longer half-life, where this stuff lives on,
where this stuff, you know what I mean,
we're gonna eventually boil this down to Romney and Obama.
And it'll change in that sense
because the whole focus of what's going on
in the news right now is about to change significantly
as we look forward to November.
But yeah, I mean that's definitely something
that I think as an organization we're trying
to think more creatively and think differently
about how we produce the news
so that the online stuff doesn't just stay online
and the print stuff doesn't just stay in print,
that there's much more communication back and forth.
And I think Martin is ready to come up
and bid you farewell.
Thank you, Anthony.
Very much.
And we're gonna wrap up.
We're gonna put the screen up.
We're gonna open the bar again.
And I just wanna thank you again for coming
and join the ONA.
I know I will, eventually, someday.
Thank you, Julie, for the idea of this
and for convincing us to do it.
We had a good time and hope you all did too.
And we'll be around, pinhole us, talk to us,
follow us on Twitter, and so on.
But thank you very much for coming.
Thank you.
